Hey, I'm Flora Litman and you're
listening to Science Friday.
[music]
Today in the podcast, how do you write
the story of cancer?
>> If you [music] want to understand your
disease in a metaphorical way, if you
want to think of it as an enemy, think
of it as an enemy. If if that's [music]
harmful to you, if you feel as if that
that's going going to hurt you, don't do
it. There's no one [music] way of
thinking about cancer.
>> 20 years ago, a young oncologist,
overwhelmed by the intensity of treating
cancer patients, started journaling to
process his feelings. That cathartic act
eventually turned into a Pulitzer
Prize-winning book that fundamentally
changed the way that millions of people
understand cancer, the emperor of all
malades.
The book turns 15 this winter and its
author Sedartha Mukerji is now one of
the most celebrated modern science
writers. We're talking with Sid about
how our understanding of cancer
prevention and treatment has evolved and
how his understanding of cancer has
changed too. Sid, welcome back to
Science Friday.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> You study cancer, you treat cancer, you
write about cancer and I want to start
with a writerly question.
How do you think about cancer
narratively? Is it a character to you?
Is it a David and Goliath story? And how
has that story changed since you wrote
the book?
>> Well, the the story's remained in some
ways the same. The closest I can
describe it, closest I can describe
cancer is a manyheaded hydra. Um it's um
obviously something that's penetrated
our lives um in very complex ways. You
know, we say something is a is a cancer
in our social lives.
>> We we use it as a metaphor for
everything that's wrong. Malignant is is
a a word that we use as a metaphor for
everything that that that cannot be um
easily destroyed and is destroying us.
And so, you know, there is no one
cancer. So, I think about it as a a
manyheaded beast. Um some people
occasionally say, you [clears throat]
know, you thinking about cancer
metaphorically or even anthropologically
is problematic. Um
>> why?
>> Well, I think they they they think that
you know it it sort of takes it a
disease and and makes it into a metaphor
or makes it into something that it is
not. And my usual answer to patients
especially is is use what you want to
use. Um, if you want to understand your
disease in a metaphorical way. If you
want to think of it as an enemy, think
of it as an enemy. If you think want to
think about your journey through cancer
as a battle, uh, do so. If if if that's
harmful to you, if you feel as if that
that's going going to hurt you, don't do
it. There's no one way of thinking about
cancer, just like there is no one way of
thinking about any disease.
Well, that's I wanted to ask you about
that because you know we often hear it's
not one disease
and at the same time there is a center
right and and very recently on the show
we talked about animals that don't get
cancer or don't appear to get cancer and
it it makes you think that even though
it's not one disease there must be ways
to prevent all cancers.
Well, it's a this is the this is the
strange uh I wouldn't say it's a
paradox, but it's a strange reality
which is that um cancer is as as you
very well know and often has been
described as you know really hundreds of
diseases but there is a common there is
a commonality between them and the
center of what I'm trying to prevent,
treat or cure is a is is an aberration a
genetic aberration in cells. Um, and
it's important to stress that
commonality because it's these
commonalities that are often uh what
we're trying to target in terms of
preventing and and and treating cancer.
>> I want to talk about this disturbing
trend of young people getting diagnosed
with certain cancers, colon cancer,
rectal cancer, at higher rates than
before.
Do we know why?
>> We don't know why. And one very
important thing that I point out in the
book is that in in in cancer especially
in cancer diagnosis it's uh very
important to distinguish between uh
reality and statistical miages. So I'm
almost certain that uh the increase in
diagnosis of in colorectal cancer in
young men women is not a statistical
mirage but um occasionally you'll see
things like because there's a new
diagnostic test that comes up all of a
sudden the incidence of a certain cancer
goes up and that's that's only because
>> that's only because you've introduced a
new test and it's it's diagnosing people
earlier. So um in the case of of of uh
colorectal cancer in young men and women
I don't think that it's be it's a it's a
statistical mirage. I think it's real.
We still have to find out whether these
cancers how they behave because not
enough time has passed. So we have to
find out whether they behave badly in
the sense that they invade do they cause
death do they cause disability and so
forth.
>> Um the question of why is a is is an
incredibly important question. One of
the things that I point out in in the
new version of the book is that we're
slowly discovering a whole class of new
carcinogens, cancercausing agents which
cause cancer uh not by causing genetic
mutations in cells ra but rather by
changing the environment the soil um in
which the seed of cancer grows. Um, so
these are carcinogens that are often act
through inflammation and then they
enable previously dormant cancer cells
to start growing because they create an
environment which is the a soil which is
promalignant a a promalignant kind of
soil.
>> Give me some examples.
>> The most recent example which is really
fascinating is air pollution. Um so so
microscopic particles of air pollution
the the the smallest kind we now um have
very strong evidence that shows that
these air pollution which we um didn't
fully understand um as a carcinogen
causes cancer most likely by causing
inflammation in the lungs. They go the
particles lodge into the lungs and cause
a very particular kind of inflammation.
It's very important to emphasize that
it's not just you know we use the word
inflammation. It's a it's kind of a
broad term. Yeah,
>> it's a broad term, but this is a very
particular kind of inflammation and this
is a kind of inflammation that allows
cancer cells to grow. Now I I can't
emphasize how important this news is
because all of a sudden instead of
looking for things that cause genetic
mutations which are also carcinogens
like X-rays for instance uh or or
formaldahhide um you know these are
carcinogens but instead of looking for
you know mutationcausing genetic
mutation causing carcinogens we can
start looking for inflammagins uh things
that cause inflammation in this
particular way and use a whole new
series of tests um to find them. So the
field is um I would say in some ways a
flame again. It's in a way that it has
not been for many years. And so this
reinvigoration of of um carcinogenesis
or the understanding of carcinogenesis
is very exciting because as you know
prevention is the most important way uh
that we can deal with cancer.
>> You know there was a a study just
recently tying colctal cancer to
processed foods. Do you think diet has
been overlooked as a variable in cancer?
>> Absolutely. Um I think diet has been
overlooked. In fact, one of the things
that I do scientifically in the
laboratory is to look at diet both as a
potential mechanism for treatment of
cancer as well as a potential mechanism
for the for causing cancer. Um and I
think diet has been overlooked partly
because um dietary surveys are
notoriously difficult. Um, and that's
because, you know, the the the essence
of what a diet is is ultimately
obviously a series of molecules, but but
those molecules come in in various
different forms. For instance, you can
have
excess processed fat in your diet
because you're eating, I don't know,
Cheetos, or you can have excess
processed fat in your diet because
you're eating some other substance. So,
it's the molecules that are ultimately
driving potentially driving the risk of
cancer. But, but a dietary survey
doesn't know how to capture molecules.
It can only capture, you know, what
you're actually eating. So, it's it's a
it's a notorious problem. And in fact,
interestingly, a kind of problem that AI
can solve because it can deconvolute the
the very complicated diets that people
are people eat. And if we could just
deconvolute them and and and and
understand the risk of cancer, it would
be this would be an interesting
interesting problem that one could
solve.
>> Let's talk briefly about screening. I I
know that you have a nuanced view of
screening and I think it might surprise
people that you're not always
pro-screening.
>> Absolutely. And I think it's very
important to have a nuanced view of
screening. So um we hope that you know
screening uh will detect cancer early
and uh if you detect cancer early of
course you know you have a greater
chance of being cured of cancer um that
we know. The problem with with screening
is that screening is full of deep
statistical pitfalls. I'll give you just
um a couple of them. Um first of all
when you screen someone you get false
positives and false negatives. False
positives are things that you know when
you screen someone it it lights up uh
but in fact you don't have cancer. Um a
false negative is just the opposite. Um
you screen someone it says the test
comes back all clean all clear but in
fact you do have cancer. Um so screening
tests have to navigate between false
positives and false negatives. But more
importantly a screening test will not
tell you about the behavior of a cancer.
So for instance, you might find a cancer
uh in a screening test, but that cancer
has already spread all over and so you
think that it's localized. Uh you
perform invasive tests and invasive
surgery, for instance, to remove the
local cancer, but it's already spread.
It's too late. The horse has left the
barn as it were. And so that screening
test has actually resulted in in you
know an operation the consequences
operation and and physical harm and
potentially risks uh associated with uh
with that surgery but really done you no
good because the cancer has already
spread to outside the body. So screening
tests, what they're trying to capture is
the is what I call the mind of cancer,
the behavior of cancer, what cancer will
do. But screening tests don't do that.
They capture the body of cancer, not the
mind of cancer. By and by that I mean
>> not how it's going to behave but where
it is.
>> That's exactly right. That's so there
are many many statistical pitfalls. So
you know I encourage people to read
through and be very thoughtful about
screening tests. So, um, that's why I
dedicated an entire chapter to this.
>> Yeah. I mean, it's interesting. There
was just a study this week out in JAMAMA
estimating that over 60,000 lives would
be saved over 5 years if we screened
more widely for lung cancer. And I was
thinking of you and your book and
thinking that it must be hard to write
about and and wondering if you ever
worry about
people taking the wrong message away.
you know that oh screening I I don't
need to get screened at all or like
because it really does feel like it's
case by case.
>> Well the the import the most important
message that one can take from that
chapter is that if you screen people who
are who are likely to have cancer the
chances that the test will actually be
real is much higher. So in the case of
lung cancer, the first group of people
you want to screen are for instance um
60 year old and above uh long-term
smokers. The chances that you find a
lump in in that population and that
turns out to be cancer is much much
higher than if you screen a 20-year-old
person who's never smoked in their
lives.
If so, so the idea of using prior
probability to guide screening trials is
absolutely crucial and we can do that
now. We can we have genetics to guide
us. We have behavioral studies to guide
us. We can really screen in a much more
thoughtful way than just sort of as I
said screening a 20-year-old person with
no risk factors for lung cancer and and
finding a lump and saying, "Oh, it's
cancer. Let's take it out." and and
having all the various toxicities
associated with u with with a false
positive.
[music]
>> Okay, we have to take a quick break, but
don't go away because when we come back,
we're going to ask Sid how he thinks
about this problem of declining trust in
science [music]
and how we get it back. I think the
problem is that that um that a lot of
science communication tries to simplify
things and and doesn't [music] respect
people's nuanced intelligences.
>> Don't go away.
>> [music]
>> you know, as we're talking about the
nuances of, you know, talking and
writing about science, which of course
is um near and dear to me, too.
I'm curious for your thoughts on on this
issue we're facing with trust in science
declining.
Well, you're raising an incredibly
important issue, which is even as we do
better science and more uh nuanced
science and send out, I would think,
more nuanced messages about the
discoveries that we're making. Uh trust
in science is is decreasing. The only
way to um combat that, I think, is to
continue um what you're describing as as
nuanced writing about science and not
give people false impressions, false
hope, um but really make them think
through uh the process by which we
communicate about science and and be
true to that that idea. Many of the
chapters in this book um have a lot of
nuance to them. They describe, they walk
you through why something um is maybe a
statistical mirage even if you think
that it's a you know it's it's it's a
great invention. Um and
that process of really respecting
people's intelligence, people really
really respecting it and taking that
idea to heart.
>> Um and telling people what the
excitement is on one hand, but
respecting their intelligence, I think,
is the only thing is the only antidote
to the um the anti-science rhetoric that
has spread all over. I think the problem
is that that um that a lot of science
communication tries to simplify things
and and doesn't respect people's nuanced
intelligences and and then gets caught
in its own trap as it were because you
know you're promising things that that
that really don't exist. I think really
paying attention and to to the nuance um
is is is helpful and and eventually
>> trust your audience. Yeah, trust your
and respect your audience because
wherever that audience is uh there they
I mean and and I found this across you
know when I when I do readings of the
from the book or from my articles across
the United States and across the world
there are people in all sorts of places
who obviously care deeply about cancer.
Cancer is not a red or blue disease. It
is not a uh black or white disease. It
it is very much uh you know prevalent in
every population. So the idea of of of
trusting the audience and giving them
all the nuances um I think is extremely
important and that brings a a level of
trust back into the system.
>> One last one before we go. I know art is
important to you. You were trained in
classical singing as a kid.
Does that have anything to do with your
work? Is there an intersection?
>> I think it's very important in the book.
uh you'll see the juxtiposition of very
deep scientific writing I hope um and
then I switch very quickly to I would
say some of the poetics of of writing
about an an illness that's consumed our
lives and you know one great example is
that the very last page of the book is
actually a um um a poem I'll read it out
very quickly it's a short poem um from
and Udu put um and I this is the
translation um what I searched so
earnestly for I never found but just in
that searching I found the whole
universe and unbound and that poem is
important because it captures the
journey of an of a of a young oncologist
becoming now an an older oncologist. Um
and so and the humility that that that
a lot of this has has brought to my own
life that humility uh combined with the
excitement of all the new new science
can only be described by this this short
uh poetic verse. And that's why I think
it's very important to um mishmash or
crisscross um the write the writing of
deep science with uh with with an
artistic uh quality.
>> Give us the poem one more time. Uh so
it's by uh Aklak Muhammad Khan uh who
wrote uh under the name Shari. What I
searched so earnestly for I never found
but just in that searching I found the
whole universe unbound.
>> Sedartha Mukerji is an oncologist and
author of the emperor of all malades
[music] which turns 15 this winter. Sid
thanks for joining us.
>> Thank you very much. [music]
Today's episode was produced by Kathleen
[music] Davis. I'm Flora Likman. Thanks
for listening.
[music]